So, you mentioned earlier on in the
discussion how it's possible that some
patients, when they're looking for a
clinician who who can assist them, that
they might come across somebody who over
promises. They say things like they're
going to cure the cancer.
How do patients, when they're navigating
trying to find a a clinician, how do
they avoid practitioners who
oversimplify this problem and over
promise?
Right.
>> I think sometimes it comes down to the
relationship between the patient and the
physician, but they [clears throat] need
to listen to them,
use their intuition, use their ears, and
say, "I trust this doctor." Because
there's no way they're at this point
that they're going to know maybe the
depth of what the doctor knows or
doesn't know, but they need to
understand
if someone [clears throat] says, "I'm
going to 100% do this," that's always a
red flag.
But being confident is another uh thing.
We want physicians that aren't afraid to
give hope. And we're taught day one of
medical school, "Don't give false hope."
Well, I believe the minute we take hope
away from a cancer patient, I've seen it
time and time again, that's when they
struggle and don't do well.
I think we [clears throat] need to give
more hope. So, there's a fine line
between giving the hope and saying, "I'm
going to I I'm going to 100% cure your
your cancer."
So, just that fine line, and they have
to have a good relationship with their
physician. I can also speak a little bit
to that with metabolic therapy,
>> [clears throat]
>> metabolic ketogenic metabolic therapy,
a lot of the success of the outcome
depends on the patient themselves. So,
um if the patient knows what to do and
how to do it, they feel empowered.
Uh for the first time, they are actually
playing a major role in the outcome,
uh as opposed to what's currently being
done where your
your very destiny and soul is handed off
to an organization that has a less than
stellar track record. So,
I agree 100%. If you have a clinician
that understands the concepts and can
work with the energy of the patient
together as a team,
the hope becomes so much stronger. And
you feel that you're you're you're
you're you're you're in a fight that you
can you can potentially win. The other
The other thing is we [clears throat]
never use the term cure. I told my
students and everybody
on people who come out and say oh you
metabolic therapy, they're saying it
cures cancer. No, we don't. We're saying
it's an effective new strategy to manage
cancer. We have no idea whether it's
going to cure anybody, nor does the
establishment have any idea whether
they're going to cure anybody. We have
We have people that are told they have
no evidence of disease after two or
three years, and then in four years it
springs back.
Well, where What happened to the
so-called cure that you told me I had?
No, no. So, the only way we know you're
cured
if if
if you have cancer at some age and you
live to be very old and die from
something other than the cancer, then
you obviously were cured.
>> [laughter]
>> Right. Right.
Another problem with many cancer
patients is that even though they
struggle and suffer from
the toxicities that are given to them to
manage their disease,
they always
many of them many of them even when
given that the certification that we
have no evidence of disease, still fear
still have some sort of an internal fear
that at any moment they this thing could
rear its head and put them back into a
state of shock and suffering and and
this kind of thing. But I I think with
metabolic therapy, you you can manage
the the disorder. We like Pablo Kelly
was never cured of his brain
glioblastoma, deadly brain cancer, but
he survived for over 10 years,
almost 11 years um
with it never going away, but under
management. So, he would have never had
that length of survival had he gone
traditional ways without radiation,
chemo, and and and
these other approaches. So, here again,
do are you cured? We don't know. Are you
living longer than expected? Yes. Are
you living a higher quality of life?
Yes. Well, that's success.
That's right. And you know, I tell
patients instead of thinking, I have to
do this. I need to do this the rest of
my life or I need to do it right now. I
have to I say, these are the same
therapies that are being utilized with
the Navy SEALs, with the astronauts.
These same way of eating, exercising, a
lot of the things that we're telling
them to do. Don't think of it is because
I'm sick.
Think of it is this is the best way for
me to live and survive and thrive. So, I
turn that picture a little bit. So,
whenever we do get to NED, no evidence
of disease, when we can get there, then
they're not in that fear state. They're
just in this I'm in a healthy mode and
this is the way I want to live. And I
think another point is very important.
It's hard for
current patients to hear, but it's true.
A lot of my thrivers say cancer was the
best thing that ever happened to me. And
you that sounds hard. Why would that be
the best thing that ever happened?
Because it woke them up to what's
important in their lives
and their relationships. They knew who
they are. They're just not mom. They're
not just, you know, CEO of the
corporation. They had to find themselves
and find a real connection with
something outside of themselves and they
see it to this day as a blessing whether
they're going to cure or not, they see
it as that wake up call to become who
they were meant to be in this world. So,
I we try to reframe things all the time.
It's a bad thing. We Sorry, you have it.
This is terrible. I you know, all
acknowledge the disease process. But,
giving that hope and seeing a different
side of it as well.
That's very important perspective. I
think the discussion around hope is also
very important for cancer patients. The
great thing about this research is that
it is very hopeful. Both of you engage
with conventional oncology in different
ways. So, Dr. Warden, you interact with
patients at the bedside who have had
experiences with various clinicians and
Dr. Seyfried, you work with different
oncologists in your research. How do you
collaborate with traditional
oncologists? What has the response been
when you discuss this research with
them? When I when I when I work with the
oncologists that understand metabolic
therapy, it's a very fruitful
collaboration. Dr.
uh Abdul Slocum from Istanbul and I work
very closely together in in managing his
advanced cancer patients.
And uh you know, I've worked with a
number of clinicians, but many of the
mainstream oncology centers
unfortunately are not rec- they do not
either recognize or acknowledge
metabolic therapy. So, although they
slowly are coming to realize this
realization
when they're starting to see
patients that are that are doing this
together with what they're receiving
from the traditional oncologists, it's
kind of interesting because what we're
what we're seeing often
is that these folks who have advanced
cancers that are doing metabolic therapy
either alone or with the consultation of
of a clinician that understands this
together with their traditional
radiation or chemo whatever whatever
they've
prescribed for that individual
the response that I'm seeing more and
more is they're called
outliers
or [laughter] flukes. Um Yeah. They they
say we don't often see someone respond
this way and you're an outlier.
What does that mean? That means that
most of the people
who aren't doing metabolic therapy do
not respond as well as those who do
conventional therapy together with
metabolic therapy. And some inquisitive
physicians will say let me let me ask
you what are you doing? Where most of
them say I don't know what you're doing.
I don't care but just keep doing it. So
you have a broad range of responses
that are
listed and sometimes you you get these
responses back and they kind of whisper
all the time not all the time but many
times whispering as if this is something
secretive that you please you know I
can't really say too much but what are
you doing and why are you doing so well
because I don't most of my patients
don't I don't see that. And so we're
breaking through some of these barriers
but to be honest with you that the wall
is still very very steep and high
and a lot of major oncology centers are
resistant to this because it's not part
of their overall training or knowledge
base
but but it's happening and it's
happening slowly and people want this
cancer patients want this
because it's not as toxic and not as
harmful as what they what they're given.
And now we're beginning to see certain
things that we have a paper that'll be
coming out in Lancet Oncology
uh showing how traditional therapies for
cancer
actually create hyperglycemia
uh which is a state where tumor cells
will grow faster.
Um and peop- people people are now
becoming more and more aware of this of
the sugar issue. Uh it and and we find
it's striking that the majority of
oncologists are not even [snorts] aware
uh that sugar plays a major role in
driving dysregulated uh cell growth. So
so uh it's an educational mission, it's
an experience mission.
And and and we're starting to see the
change, but but it's so broad at this
time. Yeah.
And I 100% agree. You know, I've worked
with uh alongside a conventional
oncologist for several years now, and
that reality of how they're responding
is very nuanced. Some are genuinely
curious and collaborative, others are
cautious, understandably so, right? And
some are openly resistant. And I get it.
They're trained in a specific paradigm
under enormous pressure and with limited
time to investigate the approaches
outside of their protocols. And even if
and even when I won't say if when they
see these phenomena, as they call it
they're like, "Wow, that's okay.
Whatever you're doing keep doing it
because this this person is doing far
better than we ever thought we could,
but they aren't allowed within the
standard of care to say, 'Yes, I think
you should try ketogenic diet or
hyperbaric oxygen or any any of these
outliers, as they call it.' They're not
allowed to say it, even if they might
think it. But I will say what is
changing that I see is the science, and
that's thanks to Dr. Seyfried's work and
the mounting clinical evidence that we
have. So, I'm having a different
conversation with oncologists now than I
did even 5 years ago. I have established
relationships with heads of research
department. We're talking MD Anderson,
City of Hope,
Cancer Treatments Well, they're the same
now as Cancer Treatment Centers of
America, but different institutions.
Now, the institution itself is not
going, "Yes, we're all in. We're going
to adopt this." But, some of the major
players there
understand and know, and they'll say, "I
want you to work with In this case, Dr.
Wardner, a metabolic
uh oncology expert, because we see that
it is somehow working." Uh so, I you
know, I don't spend my time anymore. I
used to try to those that said, "Oh,
it's bunk." They tell their patients,
"There's no science. I don't want Don't
do it." And I would say I would reach
out and say, "Can I speak with you, and
can I send you what research we do
have?" And they'll say, "Well, there's
not enough research." I said, "Well,
here it is. Will you read it?" "Well,
no, I'm too busy."
Well, that's a door that has been
closed. I don't spend my time in there
anymore. But, what I will say is that
there are
several physicians Many physicians that
do want to learn. So, my focus right
now, all of our focus, is on those in
time and educating and collaborating
with them. So, progress is happening.
Yes, it's slower than we'd like, but
it's there. And it's exciting, because 5
years ago, I would have had to just say,
"I promise just not to get in the way. I
won't do anything that will interfere
with what you're doing. Do you trust me
to not do that?" And they'll say, "Yes,
we trust you to not get in the way of
what we're doing." Now, it's more
collaborative
to say, "I see I see these changes."
Dr. Seyfried, when you discuss your
research with
other researchers in the oncology field,
what resistance is there towards any
research that does not adhere to the
genetic model for cancer? This is in the
in the realm of the science now
uh where we have overturned the the
somatic mutation theory,
which is ultimately what is the uh
driver of the treatments that
people are are receiving in the clinics.
If you go to the National Cancer
Institute website, it says cancer is a
genetic disease. Uh the evidence against
that now is so overwhelming, it's it's
embarrassing [snorts]
uh for educated people to even state
that any longer.
Um I mean, the evidence that we and
others have collected uh
overturned that. It goes back to the
theory. So, the theory under which you
treat disease, if the theory is correct,
uh the outcomes will be significantly
improved. If the theory under which
you're treating the disease is
incorrect, then the outcomes will never
be optimal. And and right now,
um the treatments that are being given,
at least the newer ones that I mean,
radiation and toxic uh chemo is also
related to the theory that cancer is a
genetic disease in some way because,
you know, the the repair mechanisms of
DNA and all this kind of stuff, uh
they're trying to disrupt DNA and
outcompete repair mechanisms and all
this. It's all It's all related to the
somatic mutation that mutations are the
real problem, and we've shown that that
these mutations are by downstream
effects. They're not really the drivers
of anything. They're pretty much effects
of mitochondrial disturbance. But, right
now, the the main challenge within the
field of cancer metabolism is the
refusal on the part of the uh academic
uh metabolic field for the refusal to
accept that mitochondrium uh are
dysfunctional.
Um and and we have gone through and
shown in no uncertain terms that the
evidence used to support mitochondrial
functionality is how
how effective they are in consuming
oxygen. Make making it appear as if
oxygen consumption is an accurate marker
for the efficiency of oxidative
phosphorylation. And we published papers
clear evidence
we and others show that oxygen
consumption in a tumor cell is a is not
linked to efficient oxidative
phosphorylation.
Um which now disturbs a lot of folks
because they say, "Oh, you know,
mitochondria are normal and effective."
No, they're not. Uh we have looked at
hundreds of cancers and none of them
have normal numbers and function of
mitochondria.
Uh and once you realize that uh then you
realize the cells have to ferment, which
is getting energy from non-oxidative
sources. And we have defined the two
major sources as glucose and glutamine,
and the tumor cells cannot switch to
respiratory fuels like ketones or fatty
acids.
So, this is all based originally on
Warburg's findings, the giant in the
field of cancer biology and
biochemistry, and our findings. We've
clarified where Warburg made mistakes.
Uh we've cleaned up a lot of the uh uh
inconsistencies and mis- uh
misunderstandings and uh false
assumptions. And now we know that there
are no uh fuels other than glucose and
glutamine that are the drivers of the
disregulated uh growth, the fuels that
drive the disregulated growth.
Uh we understand that the mitochondria
controls the cell cycle. So, cells
proliferate through the the the cell
cycle in an unregulated way due to the
mitochondria's inability to control
calcium currents. So, we we know pretty
much what's going on metabolically.
And now knowing what what's the energy
source, we now know how to target this
effectively uh using drugs and
procedures uh in part the whole concept
of mitochondrial metabolic therapy or
ketogenic metabolic therapy. So, we can
shut down these tumor cells with minimal
toxicity. And at the same time, if we
plan to use an immunotherapy or whatever
chemo might be there, we we can pare
down the dosages very, very
significantly and have these traditional
procedures work so much more effectively
if you're choke holding the two fuels
driving the dysregulated growth. The
tumor cells can't handle it. So, the
strategy becomes very, very clear and
effective based on our understanding of
what the actual biology and biochemistry
happens to be of the tumor cells. And we
can't find any tumor that is not
dependent on glucose and glutamine. So,
what this means then is that the idea
that cancer is a hundred different
diseases and all these kinds of things,
no, it's a singular problem of
mitochondrial dysfunction. And once
people understand that, there'll be a
singular strategy for managing this. And
that strategy is called ketogenic
metabolic therapy, which does not
exclude standards of care, but brings
them in in a different way and in in a
different process. So, everything will
be uh just rearranged. We're just re-
we're just rearranging the way we do
things to be more effective and have the
patient survive uh far longer with a
higher quality of life because now we
understand the problem uh of of the
biology and biochemistry of of what
we're dealing. And again, part of this
comes from enhancing the health and
vitality of the normal cells and the
body. So,
in our new view, when you treat cancer,
the you the tumor get weaker and weaker
and dissolves and the body gets stronger
and stronger and healthier. So, the
patient then emerges like Dr. Warden
said, following this with a with a new
state, a new a new overall state of
health. Not not to be uh look like some
poor person uh death warmed over or on
the verge of from being, you know,
brutalized by a system that really
doesn't understand the biology and
biochemistry. So, once once you realize
this, it's going to be the new standard
of care. We're still working out the
details, but the science right now is
stronger than the actual clinical
application. So, the clinicians will get
their act together soon and and be able
to dovetail their knowledge in with what
we understand the science to be. And I'm
encouraged by the patients. Those that
have stage four cancers, but they feel
great. They're actually going on
marathons, riding their bikes. They feel
good. They're doing well. They have
hope. That I'm inspired by them because
they're they're seeing themselves and I
say, "Okay, let's treat you like an
athlete who happens to have this
disease." [laughter]
We need to push against the cancer, but
we need to to your point make the
healthy body and the healthy cells even
healthier to help us because the body's
own pharmacy is far stronger than
anything that we've got. So, they they
like that. They like that messaging and
they do really well with it. And I'm I'm
I'm inspired every day
by the courage of these patients that
have gone to their oncologist saying, "I
want to have a a say in my treatment. I
want this is what I want to do. Will you
work with me?" And I coach them on what
to say and how to say it so they don't
offend. And I said, "We need your
oncologist on board to track to know
what we're doing." But they they have
done well and the oncologist now, Tom,
I'm very excited to have several
recently that have said, "Okay, I'll
give you a lower dose because you're
doing these therapies. Let's just see
and I'll track it. I promise to continue
to track, work with Dr. Ward. Let's
track this and see and I will give you a
lower dose." So, I I I'm encouraged.
Yeah, well, I think the lower dose is
important because the strategy now is is
is dose the patient as high as you can
within the standards.
And hope that you you survive more than
the tumor.
You know, but we're we're realizing when
this patient is in nutritional ketosis
the lowest dose that's
you have a range. The lowest dose or the
highest dose. We're we're seeing that
the lowest dose is more effective than
the highest dose when you're under
nutritional ketosis and you suffer
minimal side effects. Right. So the
tumors are getting specifically hammered
while the normal cells are getting
stronger and stronger. What is wrong
with this with this strategy? Can
someone please tell me why this strategy
is not the best strategy?
>> of care, right? It's not that standard
of care. It's not in the box or they're
afraid to step outside of the box. Well,
I but And their hands are tied. Their
hands are tied by the system. But they
are they still have a a range of dosages
within the standard.
>> That's right.
>> So you cannot go below a certain dose
>> Yeah. nor can you go above a certain
dose. But the lowest dose that's in the
standard turns out to be more effective
than the highest dose in the standard.
And there's some are doing it. Some have
agreed to do it. Yeah.
>> So. And but that they're still within
they would not they would still fall
within the guideline. Would not lose
their their license because they chose
to do something different. It's in the
guidelines. They just choose not to use
that part of the guidelines. But there's
another piece there, Tom. It might be
within the guidelines, but if the family
if the family if the patient expires on
us and their family comes back and says,
"Why didn't you go with the highest
dose?" They're afraid. They're they're
afraid outside of standard of care.
They're afraid of being sued. It's just
a litigious No, it is it is.
It is and I think we that also part of
our
developing organization Yeah. has to
address those issues as well.
>> That's right. So we have to take away
this fear or this litigious aspect of
this and have patients perhaps sign
papers or or things and that's out of my
sphere. I can't even speak to it. The
insurance companies also have to be
trained to know about this. So
there's a whole world of other things
that go that go behind all this and that
all has to be worked out. And we need
help. That's why on our next podcast
that we do together, we're going to be
announcing all the players, all the
amazing things. We've got funding coming
in. It's very exciting. We have support,
but we need more. So on the next one
we'll be asking everyone to help in ways
that they can uh because this is a big
boulder to move up the hill, but we can
do it. But we're we are going to need
more help. Yeah, and we need the the
funds to run the preclinical studies as
well cuz I can ferret out all the things
that work or don't work and make it a
lot easier for the clinicians to see
things happening. That's right. Yeah,
we're excited about that. That's the
next step. That's the one that we are
all very excited about and and the
patients need to know that you know,
their cancer care should never be
passive and they're not powerless,
right? And that the best we can have the
best science and knowledge and agency,
but they need to have a physician that
see they sees them as a partner not as a
protocol. So patients have a lot of
power here
to say I want to I want to listen to
this and do this. So I'm I'm very
hopeful about all of it and I cannot
express how much
gratefulness we have for you, Tom, and
the work that you're doing. Well, you're
the
you've got the you're the foundation for
it. Yeah, well, but the the change to
change a paradigm
uh
it doesn't happen easy. And that was one
of the questions that Morgan had, I know
what is the resistance to something
that's so strongly
linked to the science. And people have
been led to believe that cancer is a
genetic disease. It's an It's a
confirmation bias ideological dogma.
Just like I said, the National Cancer
Institute still says it's a genetic
disease. Institutional inertia. I mean,
the institutions have built entire
entire structures around cancer as a
genetic disease.
>> I know.
>> Um the academic and and health care
industries are all based on cancer being
a genetic disease. Yes. People have
become very rich and famous
uh sequencing genomes and and telling
the world that we're going to we're
going to we're going to cure cancer by
targeting this or that. That has fallen
through tremendously. Peer pressure. You
you try to do something just like you
were saying, "Oh, you can't tell your
patient to do this. You have to stick to
the standard of care. You you cannot
deviate from this." The peer peer
pressure uh on that. And paradigm
paralysis. We are locked in this
paradigm of treating cancer patients
with toxicity and and these very
expensive procedures that cause
sometimes can cause more harm than good.
So, you put all that together and you
have an entire locked-in industry that
is very profitable in treating patients
the way we're treating them. The problem
is we have a cancer crisis that's
getting worse and worse and people are
dying and suffering needlessly
to maintain the paradigm. And our job is
to overturn the paradigm through hard
science and clinical outcomes.
And eventually it'll crumble. The
current paradigm will crumble with the
outstanding observations that we see
from stage four cancer patients or
preventing it in the first place. So, so
all this is going to happen. It has to
happen because we're we're on a dead end
course right now and it's getting worse
and worse and we can change it.
And I really believe that the patients
will be from the bottom up the thing
that will make the change because if
they go to their oncologist, if they
continue to move up that chain that
we're talking about and said, I don't
want to do it this way, there's another
way I would like for you to try, they
can't ignore it for too long. I think
our patients and these beautiful
foundations that are offering us money,
Tom, to be able to do the research, uh
those family foundations, uh that's
where it's to me, it's a my biggest
piece with this organization is
education. You've got the research end,
we've got to continue to do that, but we
have to educate
>> end is expensive. Uh you know, all the
costs, uh
you know, it's just it's
>> [laughter]
>> people think, "Oh, why don't you test
this thing?"
This drug or something. And I they say,
"How much will it cost?" I said, "About
$150,000."
>> Yeah, yeah, at least, at least. Which
[laughter] is not much when you consider
when you consider the billions and
billions of dollars they're spending on
these things that don't work. Right,
right. But they make billions and
billions of dollars on those things,
right? And they can make money on them
and on the ketogenic diet, what you're
not going to make money on that.
>> actually that we're thinking that's not
necessarily the case because
practitioners will practitioners can
charge a fee
and we're not we're not denying to use
carboplatin, cisplatin, and all these
things. We just use it as a very in very
low dosages. So, you can still charge
the same amount, you're just giving half
the dose. Right, right.
>> [laughter]
>> So, so
it'll be a transition, but but um
we just, you know, change the revenue
source, but the revenue generation will
be there. So, you've both discussed the
experiences of patients who are trying
out metabolic therapy for themselves
working with a clinician like yourself,
Dr. Warden, and they're also seeing a
conventional oncologist in a hospital. I
wanted to ask because you've also
discussed a little bit about things like
nutraceuticals, and you mentioned
hyperbaric oxygen therapy, Dr. Warden.
And Dr. Seyfried, you have a discussion
on your YouTube channel with Dom
D'Agostino about hyperbaric oxygen
therapy and the research you've both
done on it. So, I wanted to ask, beyond
the nutrition, beyond metabolic
strategies, where do adjunctive
therapies fit in? Dom D'Agostino and I
published a big paper on hyperbaric
oxygen for managing cancer.
It works best when the patient or the
mouse is in nutritional ketosis. So,
what you're doing is you're you're
actually radiation therapy kills cancer
by oxidative stress. You you create
reactive oxygen species with
gamma rays. Where where as
putting an individual in high pressure
pure oxygen, you dissolve oxygen
directly in the blood. And that will
cause the tumor cell mitochondria to
produce more ROS, thus killing the tumor
cell with minimal collateral
toxicity. So, so hyperbaric oxygen or
maybe even IV vitamin C when the patient
is in nutritional ketosis can be
therapeutic. I cannot speak to red light
therapy. I've never tested this.
I have I have no I
knowledge. There's a lot of ambiguity
about that.
I don't have any any hard evidence to
say how that could increase oxidative
stress.
But again, if the person is in
nutritional ketosis, maybe we don't have
any clinical trials on that, but we
certainly know the science behind
hyperbaric oxygen and how that can be
effective. We have good preclinical data
and we have clinical
reports on hyperbaric oxygen. As long as
the individual is in a state of
nutritional ketosis when they enter the
chamber. And that could vary depending
on the day, hour, whenever that person's
GKI during the course of the day would
be lowest, then they would sit into this
chamber and have that. The cost of this
also has to be modified in some way
because they're charging so much money
for this kind of a thing.
Um but again, if it works and can
significantly reduce tumor without
toxicity, then um then people would be
willing to do that and it needs to be
covered by the insurance. You know, this
is the one of the strangest things.
Hyperbaric oxygen can be covered by
insurance to help you recover from being
irradiated and and poisoned. So you're
you're allowed to the insurance company
will say, "Okay, maybe to help your body
recover from what we did to it,
uh we can give you hyperbaric oxygen.
But if we want to use it as a tool to
kill cancer cells, we can't cover that."
So
So we need to we need to change we need
to change the the plan for some of these
insurance companies to have it part of
the part of of the procedural the
therapeutic aspect rather than the, you
know, the the the recovery aspect, I
guess you could say. You know, there are
patients that have GoFundMe's out there
right now. I think I have two or three
right now that have GoFundMe's because
people want to help. They go, "What can
I do?" They have that so that they can
do their hyperbaric oxygen treatments.
They're literally have the GoFundMe's
for their HBOT treatments. And yes, we
do it right. You've got to make sure
you're in ketosis, but it also helps
enhance the mitochondrial function in
the healthy cells. They feel good. They
sleep better. All the things that HBOT
can do on its own. So I'm a big
proponent if they can do it, but there's
financial toxicity, too. It's very
expensive. So I agree. I mean, I would
love it and hopefully we'll have enough
science soon that maybe we can start
having some of that covered by
insurance, but let's talk about a couple
of the others. I will just say I don't
ever really see most of what I do is
what I could call add-ons or
adjunctives. I see them as really
metabolic interventions prescribed at
the right time and the right dose. And
it depends on that patient's needs right
then. So red light, I've been working
with cold laser frequencies for 30 years
uh for pain management and sports
medicine and all these other things. In
fact, I was starting to do a clinical
trial with a a radiation oncologist,
head of radiation oncology at MD
Anderson and Gilbert, before she
retired. We were thinking about it
because she would send after radiation
to me the patients to do red light
therapy for their radiation burns so she
could continue and get more dosages. We
said, we had the thought, okay, if I'm
doing that, am I decreasing the effect
of the radiation? All of that still
needs to be played out. And my thing
about red light is if we're using it for
pain management or energy, I would never
have a patient do it uh directly over
the tumor. No full body, they have
panels, never where the tumor is because
red light can cause angiogenesis, that's
that blood flow increase, and that could
potentially make the cancer have a you
know, a potential to grow. I like red
light. I like it before H-bot, but it
has to be done correctly with somebody
who really knows what they're doing.
Um exercise prescribed as medicine, the
interval training is important. Improves
mitochondrial biogenesis and metabolic
flexibility. That is something that we,
you know, there's a couple of ways that
cancer usually kills you. It's cachexia,
muscle wasting, and and um metastasis
into a vital organ where it can't
function. So, we I do we do make sure
that the patients will have a a body
composition analysis to start with. If
they're losing weight, I want to know,
is it muscle? Is it fat because we're on
a better program? Or is it muscle? But
that exercise is very important and
whether it's interval training, strength
training, that has to be individualized.
Nutraceuticals,
they have to be specifically I have to
understand I use a um
I use a uh it's a liquid biopsy to be
able to see do I think they have some
utility against the particular cancer
cells. Then you have to say is it the
right for that person and will it
interfere with their meds. I do use
that. Repurpose drugs? Yes, I mean, they
show up quite a bit on these these uh
types of testing, but then you've got to
do that right because they go too high,
they're coming in and they're in liver
failure because they've overdosed on
these antiparasitics. So, everything
needs to be managed. I think they have
purpose and as we're saying, we don't
have the exact protocols yet, but we're
doing the best that we can. Anything
that supports a normal cell and fights
the cancer cells what I'm after and that
could be environmental medicine, it
could be the stress physiology that
we're talking about. So, we have to look
at all of it and sleep, I can't talk
more about sleep optimization and what
that does. So, in the micronutrient
repletion and gut health, that's your
own immune system. The microbiome and
these detox pathways. When you come to a
holistic type of a physician doing
metabolic therapies, they're looking at
all these things and saying, we know
where going where we're going, but we're
not going to throw everything at the
patient or at least my
my my opinion, they shouldn't. What do
they need right now? It's really
precision metabolic medicine.
And we talk about precision medicine in
in conventional care, but that's a whole
different meaning.
To me, individualized or precision
metabolic medicine is what is is needed
and every intervention needs to have a
reason. It's got to have a mechanism and
a monitoring plan. Not just throw
everything. Monitor what is doing what
and that's what we're about. That's what
we're we're we're gathering our
organization to be able to monitor these
things. And I I always I always find it
interesting when you talk or other so
many people talk about the importance of
your microbiome
and and how how how necessary that is
for the global um
metabolic homeostatic state. And yet
when you take uh treatments from the
conventional Oh, yeah. Nothing nothing
could be more damaging to your
microbiome. I know I know antibiotics
and the conventional treatments. I mean
you hear about all these drugs that
diarrhea nausea vomiting all I mean this
is blowing your microbiome out you're
going bald
mucositis you got you got every kind of
a of a horrific damage to your body and
yet everybody's talking about you
shouldn't do that and yet you do it so
it doesn't make any sense. And then
the issue you know they've got leaky gut
because permeability they can't absorb
their nutrients it's just a but what's
happening come as we know by the time
they get to us this is why we need more
awareness and education by that time
they get to us they're usually stage
four they've either failed conventional
medicine and they're so toxic and so
depleted now they're expecting a miracle
out of what we've got now we can help
but it's sad I when I get somebody
coming to me in stage one and stage TWO
I'M LIKE WOOHOO. Yeah yeah right. Yay
yay we can manage this we we we you know
we can we can do this but the stage four
it's realistic expectations and and it's
just they are so depleted. Right and and
we have we have very you know I I get
letters from people who are in in
hospice. Oh yeah. And they're expecting
now to turn around their whole body
after it's been brutalized horrifically
for several years
and now you're asking the body to rally
the poor the poor person is skin and
bones and they're yellow you know
they're they're not going to it's going
to be very hard to turn that turn that
ship around so knowledge that's why I'm
saying knowledge is is important if you
can manage the the cancer and and of
course they're saying you know what
great success
they're having and many of them are
defined as stage zero cancers which
they're not even cancer actually No. So,
they call it you know look at all the
success we have, but the success for
stage four cancers is abysmal.
But, if you can get them before they
become stage four, but even we have
stage many stage four people who have
turned the ship around. Pancreatic
cancer, I'm shocked at how powerful
metabolic therapy is for managing
pancreatic cancer. That's right.
>> Advanced triple negative breast cancer.
Advanced lung cancer. Yeah.
>> I mean, I've seen and everybody can't
believe what's going on. What happened
to these people? How did you turn the
turn them around? So, we're hopeful for
the future. There's no question about
it. What we're going to do a second
round round two after we have more
information regarding the organization
of our nonprofit that becomes more
organized and established.
We'll have another opportunity. And then
we can bring in our discussions that
you're not going to hear about, but we
have to make standardizations for all of
these things for the new standard of
care. So, and that takes some time. And
it has to be integrated in with the
current standard of care. So, we'll see
what happens with that with respect to
that. And maybe the new RFK, if he ever
gets his head away from these vaccines
which seems to be taking up most of his
time should really start focusing on the
really important issue like cancer which
we can we can manage. So, let's hope
that becomes another opportunity for
success. That's why this education and
knowledge and awareness is what we've
got to have. Appreciate you. Thank you,
Morgan, for for hosting this.
>> And
>> Thank you very much to you both. This is
very very good insight and I'm very
excited for a part two. And this is just
the beginning of an ongoing
conversation. So, in an upcoming episode
we'll sit down again together and go
deeper into this new nonprofit
organization that Dr. Seafried and Dr.
Wardener are building. And we'll discuss
why it was formed, how it will advance
research and education in metabolic
oncology, and how clinicians,
researchers, and supporters can get
involved in supporting this work.
>> Thank you very much, Morgan. Perfect.
Thank you, Morgan. Thank you.